# The App Academy Pair Programming Approach
________________________________________________________________________________
<!-- @import "[TOC]" {cmd="toc" depthFrom=2 depthTo=6 orderedList=false} -->

<!-- code_chunk_output -->

- [Why this way?](#why-this-way)
- [The rules](#the-rules)
  - [Partner up](#partner-up)
  - [Check-in](#check-in)
  - [Get coding!](#get-coding)
  - [Hand off](#hand-off)
  - [Follow-up](#follow-up)
- [Modifying the routine](#modifying-the-routine)
- [What we've learned](#what-weve-learned)

<!-- /code_chunk_output -->
________________________________________________________________________________

When it comes to pair programming, every team has their own process. Let's
explore App Academy's specific approach to pairing up!

We'll cover:

- the App Academy path to pair programming success,
- a quick routine for improving your pairing outcomes,
- and modifications you can make for specific situations.

## Why this way?

It might feel unnecessary to have strict rules about working together. After
all, you've been working with other people your whole life, right? Get ready -
software engineering will be different!

Working as a programmer means being faced with frequent distractions. Strict
rules help prevent those distractions so you can focus on what matters most.
Additionally: when problems arise (as they inevitably will), people tend to fall
back on old habits to cope with the stress. A rigid approach should provide us
with at-the-ready coping strategies we can fall back on. When your team shares
the same strategies, it makes it even easier to support each other through
challenges!

Ultimately, we're creating a shared language between teammates. When you move
into your new career, you'll have to adjust to the collaborative process of your
new team. Think of this as an opportunity to build a foundation for that
transition.

## The rules

Let's lay out the steps to a successful pair programming session. This process
will be the same whether you're working together in-person or remotely. 

### Partner up

You can't pair program without a pair of programmers! Your first step should be
partnering up with another student. While it might be more comfortable to have
the same partner each time, try challenging yourself to select a new partner for
every session. This will broaden your perspective and let you share your unique
approaches to software with each other.

### Check-in

Before beginning, it's a good idea to check in with each other. Take a quick
"lay of the land": what will you be pairing on? How long do you expect this
session to last? Do you need to plan breaks for lunch or does one of you have
obligations that will cut the session short? Get these details scheduled with
each other ahead of time to reduce surprises & distractions later on.

This is a great time to assign roles as well. We encourage you to stick with the
_Driver_ and _Navigator_ roles discussed previously. Over time, we've found that
students who are more comfortable with the project being worked on prefer to act
as Navigator first. This lets them establish the direction for the session and
helps support the Driver. Of course, discuss this together before making a
decision: your partner may have a different opinion!

### Get coding!

Once you've chosen initial roles, it's time to dive in! Remember that you & your
partner should be working in a single editor, not two different ones. If you're
together in-person, this means one keyboard, one monitor, and two chairs. If
you're working remotely, this means one person is sharing their editor and the
other is watching & talking only.

To start, let the initial driver set up the development environment and set a
timer for 15 minutes. The navigator should start mapping out the course of the
project, letting the driver type out code and watching out for errors. Both
driver & navigator should be in _constant_ communication: ask each other lots of
questions and double-check each other's ideas as you go! It's okay to use your
time together to search for documentation or help online as well.

If a question comes up that requires a lot of discussion or further research,
pause your timer and talk it out. As you pair program more, you'll find that
these extended discussions become less frequent. It's not that you're talking
less, but that you're comfortable enough with the process to continue coding
while working through bigger problems. 

### Hand off

We follow a 15 minute rule at App Academy. This means you should change roles
after every 15 minutes of progress - no exceptions! Frequent role reversal
ensures you're both getting equal exposure to the whole workflow, and it forces
you to stay engaged and communicate through the transition.

When the timer is up, the driver should pass control to the navigator and begin
navigating themselves. This will feel awkward at first, but remember that you're
building a new skill here: context switching while maintaining communication is
**crucial** for being an effective developer.

Stick to the timer as closely as possible. It can be tempting to finish your
current line of code/task before handing off, but that "last piece" might drag
on for another 15 minutes by itself! If you're communicating effectively, you
should be able to the hand off mid-sentence and have your pair pick up right
where you left off.

### Follow-up

It has been a long, productive day. How should you wrap up your programming
session? Take a little time to reflect! Before officially ending your session,
take a couple minutes to recap. Discuss what you accomplished. Did you meet your
goals? Take a moment to celebrate! Are there tasks left incomplete? Make a few
notes so you can pick these up with someone else next time.

The follow-up, like the check-in, helps commit your progress to memory. It's
also the perfect time to answer any lingering questions and provide/receive
feedback on how the session went. Don't skip this step because it feels
superfluous; it's just as important as the code you've written together!

## Modifying the routine

As you pair up more often, you'll encounter days where the routine just isn't
working. Maybe your partner's having a bad day - or maybe you're having a bad
day yourself! Maybe the day's material hasn't "clicked" for you yet, and you
feel like your partner is speaking a totally different language. Yikes!

The most important thing to remember is that this is **totally normal**. We
provide a strict pair programming routine to keep you on track, but we can't
plan for everything! Here are some things you can do to keep the routine fresh.

- **Step back & discuss:** If you're feeling stuck, or having trouble keeping up
  with your partner, pause your timer and step away from the keyboard. This is a
  good signal that you need to discuss progress so far and make a plan for
  moving forward. You should always feel comfortable doing this if you're unsure
  of something. Don't worry about slowing your partner down; the goal of pair
  programming is that you both progress **together**.

- **Focus on the process during your follow-up:** Understanding and mastering
  the pair programming process is as much a part of our program as JavaScript
  and data structures. If you're struggling with this process, discuss it!
  During your follow-up, take a moment to ask each other how you felt your
  communication went. You should discuss how you're working to improve your own
  performance as both a driver & navigator. By focusing on the process, you're
  taking some of the awkwardness out of the relationship, and helping each other
  feel more comfortable.

- **Remember to reflect regularly:** You may not do it daily, but it is
  important to reflect on your pair programming experiences at regular intervals
  throughout your course. At least once every few weeks, schedule some time to
  chat with a partner about how pair programming is working for you. Share your
  personal experiences and suggest a few things you'd like to do for yourself to
  improve the process. If you've paired with your partner before, this may also
  be an appropriate time to offer compliments and kind criticism.

## What we've learned

We know what pair programming _is_, and now we know _how_ to do it! Practice
following the App Academy process in your own pairing, and don't forget to
discuss your experiences as often as you can. You can't be **too** good at pair
programming; you'll be pairing up for the rest of your new career.

You should now be able to:

- describe each step of App Academy's pair programming process,
- explain why the process is important,
- and suggest some ways to modify/improve the process as necessary.
